---
title: McBaby - Now 50% Off
author: freidank
date: 2025-06-04 00:00:00 +0000
categories: [Reflections]
tags: []
render_with_liquid: false
---

I have the great gift of working in my lab with one the most genuine and creatively funny individuals I know. His humor is wholesome and always accompanies his generosity towards us colleagues. His work ethic is sound, his aptitude inspires, and his sincerity wins trust. It's not just a nice-to-have; any leader understands the critical weight of character and trust for sound team dynamics. This colleague, much more than just brighten the daily mood, forms a recognizeable feature in the mosaic of our team. He echoes in the imprints we make, both as a professional orgnization as well as individuals. No one returns from the lab to their family at home empty handed, but with an attitude and story impacted by what they have lived for the past eight or more hours; in my case, it is thankfully to my benefit.

I learned recently that this colleague of mine also has a somewhat rare autoimmune condition. I imagined something. What if his parents, when they chose to have children, elected for IVF, and were offered a panel of options that survived the initlal fertilization process. One had blue eyes, the other had brown... one was taller, one was shorter... one was expected to be a little smarter, the other a little slower... of ten options, two showed problematic genetic mutations; one for cancer, the other an autoimmune disorder. They chose a couple from the remaining eight and "discarded" the rest.

Then, in that case, my colleague was never born.

Oh, how traigc... No, I'm not talking about a tragedy. There are a million tragic reasons that could have prevented my colleague's birth; his parents could have never met, they could have died in an accident, they could have chosen a different time; wars had to be fought, certain friends made, certain bars visited... but the least of this scenario is its trageic nature. Let's try to unpack it: it's not a mere tragedy that my colleague was never born. It was a crime. To willfully have "discarded" my colleague's life in favor of some preference whatsoever is to stare my colleague in the eyes and to tell him, "Sorry; you actually do not deserve to live if there were better options than you; and if we could do it over again with today's technology, you probably would never have been wanted." Don't scoff; think it through. It's not a leap. There were ten viable lifeforms ready to pounce into greater and greater existence if only allowed; and the ones that had "defects" were not allowed, and among them was my colleague. He was not allowed because he was inferior. Hasn't humanity already been through this with the auctioning of African slaves in the 1800s, or the forced sterilizations of 1933 under Nazi eugenics? Why are we suddenly thinking it was all a great idea after all, and that it just needed a few more white lab coats, research grants and fashionably calling it a "startup" to make it ethically sterile?

Congratulations, parents! Thanks to an ever-determined scientific community to bring you what you never asked for, you will soon have access to the brand new, tantilizingly promising Build-Your-Own McBaby. The power of choice, no longer restrained to your Cook Out milkshake flavor or the trims on your new car. Now *you* too can "pick your baby," in the words of Nucleus's Kian Sadeghi, the company now offering these very possibilities.

> Nucleus also provides probability assessments for the embryos’ IQ, height and eye color. Sadeghi said that Nucleus informs customers of the strength of the various predictions. IQ predictions are limited in accuracy, according to the company. \
Sadeghi said he doesn’t draw a line between people who want to take a DNA test so they can know their own risks and try to prevent diseases and those who screen and rank embryos to choose one with a better chance of living far beyond 85. \
“The longevity movement is about taking medicine back and putting it in the people’s hands,” Sadeghi said. “Why would that not apply now to the most intimate, personal, emotional, sensitive decision you will make? Picking your baby.” ("Longevity Is Now a Factor When Picking an Embryo for IVF", Amy Dockser Marcus, WSJ)

My intent is by no means to exaggerate something for rhetorical effect, but by every means to uncover the ethical nightmare unfolding in front us, to unblind our eyes that have been blurred for reasons that are easy to explain.

Let's start with a common one: at the embryonic stage, it doesn't feel like the future person it will become really exists yet. So, at that point, it really feels no different than picking out a LaCroix flavor from the random pile in the cooler. But I'm afriad that's ChatGPT logic, inventing the next word by only considering the previous one. Let's try using our human intelligence a little and thinking further ahead. One embryo became (or more in case of twins) one person. My colleague came from one baby, and a very specific baby. I wouldn't have recognized that baby as my present colleague, but, surprise, people develop and change and grow. Destruction of that particular baby directly kills my colleague. That baby came from one embryo, and a very specific embryo. I wouldn't have recognized that embryo as that baby, no more than that baby as my colleague. But, surprise, that embryo became that baby, and that baby came from that embryo, and my colleague was that embryo. Destruction of that embryo, from my colleague's point of view, is no different than destruction of that baby, the destruction of himself.

One could find difficulty with such strong words, because it feels like one child is coming out of the equation, and it feels like it's the same child regardless of the choice of embryo. This is a delicate error, because it feels like a simple extension of the blind expectation natural to pregnancy to begin with. A mother loves "her baby", not knowing at all what it yet will be like, perhaps keeping even its gender a secret until the last moment. But we have to try and use our human intelligence just a little: one person came from one embryo, and changing embryos is not like changing the ingredients that go into a person, it is changing the very person itself. Proof enough is that all ten embryos could have been implanted in different women and ten different people would have been born. There is no quantum entanglement here; each embryo is a separate person in the earliest moments of their human development. Destruction of one embryo directly kills one person. There's no way around it. In fact, even Sadeghi knows it; he doesn't call it, "Picking your embryo;" he calls it what it is: "Picking your baby." Picking which baby will live in your arms, and which will die at your arms.

Does it still not feel like death, does it still feel like only adjusting the parameters for the oven so that what comes out is more to one's liking? That would be cosmetics, that would be therapeutics, that would be gene editting even. But here, the child is already formed as it will be; its DNA has been set. We are not adjusting parameters here, we are not tweaking ingredients; the product is already formed, it is already what it will be. It is not choosing your spouse carefully so that your offspring may be as endearing to you as your spouse is to you. We are past the point where things that can be done before life begins, and we are now at the point where life can be continued or terminated, nurtured or killed.

Another may be feeling, nobly, that they want their child to have a good life, a long life, a comfortable life. I want the same, and I hope everyone wants it, for themselves and for all. But how can one say for sure whether a life will be happy or miserable? Many, many biologically healthy individuals have succombed to suicide, strangled by mental or spiritual dispair. Likewise, many, many biologically abnormal individuals have shared lives full of love and happiness. Shall we start enlarging death row by including not only those convicted beyond a reasonable doubt but also those with "probable" guilt? Shall we deport detained immigrants just because they "might" be involved in a gang? Hey, maybe we could even get a tax refund for both. How about you say to my colleague, who has brought joy to his family and his workplace, "Since the likelihood of happiness was higher for someone else without your autoimmune disorder, if we could do it over again, we'd never let you have the chance."

It sounds harsh, though. Maybe the harshness makes the words seem like too much of a leap. I can try describing the exact same crime in many different ways. "Your life has been incredibly fruitful. Despite all odds, you have surprised the world. We will be sure never to let that mistake happen again." Or, "We regret to inform you that, due to overwhelming odds against your favor, the subsequent resources for life have been withheld and redistributed to others more likely to benefit from them."

That last one almost seems palatable if you have strong socialist leanings. Try saying it to my colleague in the face, then, like this, "We regret to inform you that, due to overwhelming probability of increased health insurance claims and federal welfare burden, you are projected to expend resources otherwise available to healthier adults suffering from acute rather than chronic conditions such as your own. As such, in accordance with the law of public democracy, your line of credit, salary, and internet communications will cease to function by the end of the calendar month. Thank you for choosing Life; we hope you enjoyed your time, and please remember to kindly fill the exit survey." If you cringe saying such a thing to him today, why not cringe saying such a thing when he was a child, or when he was a baby, or when he was in the womb, or when he was an embryo?

I am afraid some day will come when it won't frighten us anymore to even say such things even to a person's full adult face. When we will even be made to feel guilty for existing with imperfection. Oh, my bad, we're already there.

> In one [secretely recorded conversion], a hospital ethicist threatens Mr. Foley [a patient in a Canadian mental-health ward] with denial of insurance coverage and says it would cost him “north of $1,500 a day” to stay in the hospital. When Mr. Foley protested, the ethicist retorted: “Roger, this is not my show. My piece of this was to talk to you about if you had interest in assisted dying.” ("Welcome to Canada, the Doctor Will Kill You Now", Nicholas Tomaino, WSJ)