---
title: Self-love, Shame, and Narcissism 
author: freidank
date: 2025-06-05 00:00:00 +0000
categories: [Reflections]
tags: []
render_with_liquid: false
---

Para poder amar, no para enamorarme sino para amar a través de aquel enamoramiento, tengo, y será mi deseo, darme. Pero si no estoy convencido de que tengo algo digno de dar, entonces como voy a amar? Por miedo y vergüenza, no me daré según realmente soy, y no amaré. Me daré parcialmente; me dejaré cambiar fácilmente, pretenderé ser algo diferente a lo que soy, aceptaré lo que no aceptaría, dudaré de mis juicios... todo por cubrir a mi ser vergonzoso, quizás pensando que es amar el “proteger” al otro de lo que me produce ansiedad en mi. Pero no amaré, porque no daré lo que soy.

No digo que se debe alcanzar la perfección antes de poder amar. Al contrario; también se puede entregar los fallos y debilidades en amor, en confianza, en el deseo de ser mejor y la consolación de estar con alguien que así también lo desea. Pero las debilidades en un ámbito no perjudican lo que uno es, los valores de uno y el valor de uno. Si no lo disminuye a los ojos de Dios, tampoco debe a los nuestros. No se puede comprar fuerza haciéndose artificialmente débil. La “debilidad” santa es la blandura de la sinceridad.

Al otro extremo, se puede coger soberbia con los fallos y debilidades, como si fueran fuente de personalidad o credibilidad, o ocasiones tan tangibles de misericordia que mejor exagerarlos para sentirse más amado. La exageración puede ser sutil, hasta algo narcisista. Puede ser incluso institucionalizado a nivel cultural. Igual uno pronto se verá dando lo que no es; dará una imagen, una caricatura, una vida estancada, pero no a si mismo como realmente es.

Para ser sincero en el amor, para ser desnudo de alma, hay que ser humilde, apreciando todo lo que uno es y anhelando seriamente el camino de virtud, amándose por haber sido colocado por Amor en ese camino y por uno mismo disponer amor al camino.

---

I would say to love, not just to be *in* love, but *to* love, means to give myself. That's simply what loving feels like and compels a human person to do. But if I am not convinced that I am something worth giving, then how can I love? For fear and shame, I will not give myself according to who I really am, and I will not love. I will give myself partially, in pieces; I will be easily influenced, my personality will bend, I will convince myself of being something different than what I am, I will accept things strange to me just to fit in, I will doubt my judgments... all to cover my self-anxiety, perhaps thinking that it is love to "shield" the other from what bothers me about myself. But I will not love, because I will not give who I am.

I do not mean that perfection is a precondition for love. On the contrary; we can also share our faults and weaknesses in love, in trust, in the hope and desire to be better, consoled to be with someone who also hopes and desires it for me and for themselves. But our weaknesses need not invalidate who we are, the worth that we have. It does not diminish it in the eyes of God; it shouldn't in ours either. We cannot buy strength by becoming artificially weak. True "strength" is the resiliency of sincerity.

At the other extreme, it is also possible to take pride in faults and weaknesses, as if they were sources of personality or credibility, or occasions for mercy so tangible that it is better to exaggerate and emphasize them to feel more loved or in control over them. Such exaggeration and pride can be subtle, even narcissistic. It might be institutionalized within a group or become cultural. And it is dangerously entrapping; question it and you could be accused of being rigid and judgmental not only towards others but even towards yourself. Once you begin to doubt your own capacity for loving well, the joy of your sincerity will be replaced with an adopted, hollow laughter of someone else's pride. The result is the same, and one finally gives what one isn't; an image, a caricature, a label, a stagnant life, but not what one really is.

To be sincere in love, to be naked in spirit, we have to be humble, appreciating all that one is and aspiring towards a life of greater wholeness and coherency, loving oneself for having been placed by Love in that life and for disposing a real desire for that life.
